#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass itutez
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package none
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding default
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 0
\use_package cancel 0
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 0
\use_package mathtools 0
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 0
\use_package stmaryrd 0
\use_package undertilde 0
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Standard
Rubber bearings are used to prevent vibrations in the buildings and to allow
 the bearings to be displaced due to thermal expansion in the bridges.
 The first use of rubber bearings in order to protect constructions against
 earthquake effects, occurred in Pestalozzi primary school in Skopje, Yugoslavia
 in 1969.
 The same horizontal and vertical stiffness of the rubber supports applied
 as a single block caused the bulge to occur due to the weight of the building
 on the side surfaces.
 The French engineer Eugène Freyssinet, who discovered that the axial loading
 capacities of the rubber layers were inversely proportional to their height,
 suggested strengthening the rubber layers by adding thin steel plates in
 the vertical direction.
 Here the bond between the layers is provided due to the friction force.
 Thanks to the vulcanization method used to ensure that the thin steel plates
 and rubber layers adhere to each other, studies and applications of modern
 seismic isolators have begun to increase.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Seismic isolation systems are frequently used to prevent damage to structures
 in areas with high seismicity due to strong ground motions.
 Base isolated structures consist of superstructure, isolation plane and
 base isolators.
 These systems are single structures such as residential, data center building,
 hospital, liquid tank and offshore oil platform which are assumed to displace
 relatively rigid over the base isolators.
 The architectural details to be solved in the case of using separate base
 isolated structures together, are complex and expensive.
 For this reason independent superstructures are designed in common isolation
 plane.
 More particularly, constructed hospital buildings in recent years in Turkey,
 meets this definition.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Linear design methods, which are determined in consequence of carried out
 studies in the past, are consider the base isolated systems as consist
 of single or multi degree of freedom systems.
 Therefore design procedures in standards are prepared for base isolated
 structures with independent isolation plane.
 There is no design criteria in standards for dynamic interaction of base
 isolated structures with common isolation plane.
 Each of the base isolated structures which are designed in common isolation
 plane are considered in practice as if structures with independent isolation
 plane.
 As a consequence of this assumption causes the higher mode effect due to
 the hysteretic behavior of the isolators and therefore the dynamic interaction
 of superstructures to be unevaluated.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Purpose of this study is to determine amplification of the base shear coefficien
t due to interaction of superstructures by performing comprehensive parametric
 investigation for the two base isolated structures with common isolation
 plane.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Within the scope of this study, dynamic interaction of two base isolated
 structures with common isolation plane is investigated through the systems
 changes parametrically.
 In addition to this sample analyses are carried out for three and four
 base isolated structures with common isolation plane.
 In this case, number of story of superstructures, equivalent period and
 equivalent damping ratio of base isolators are considered as parameter.
 Analyses are carried out for the cases where the number of story of two
 base isolated structures with common isolation plane changes from one to
 ten.
 All analyses are repeated for 1.5, 2.5, 4.0s equivalent period and %10, %20,
 %30 equivalent damping ratio of base isolators.
 The hysteretic properties of the base isolators are normalized to obtain
 constant equivalent period and equivalent damping ratios as a result of
 nonlinear analysis versus varying superstructure mass.
 This process is performed by determining the yielded stiffness and characterist
ic strength by determining the isolator displacements obtained from the
 linear time-history analysis with the stiffness corresponding intended
 equivalent period and the equivalent damping values.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Analyses are carried out only for the direction in which the structures
 are located in the common insulation plane.
 The effects that occur other directions and the bi-directional interactions
 of the isolators are out of scope of this study.
 Story mass and story stiffnesses of superstructures are fixed for all analyses.
 Mass of the isolation plane is fixed for each structure and is calculated
 by multiplying the number of structures in the common isolation plane.
 Only linear elastic shear springs are considered in superstructure models
 which are defined as multi degree of freedom system.
 Hysteretic behavior of isolators are represented by a bilinear element.
 Only hysteretic damping which is caused by nonlinear behavior is considered
 in base isolators.
 The ground motion records used in the analyses are matched in accordance
 with the design spectrum generated according to earthquake ground motion
 level with probability of exceeding %2 in 50 years.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All analyzes were carried out by means of the MSBIS program, which was developed
 within the scope of this study, which allows nonlinear analysis of base
 isolated structures with independent and common isolation plane to be solved
 parametrically.
 Numerical solution of equation of motions is carried out with Newmark-
\begin_inset Formula $\beta$
\end_inset

 method.
 Dynamical balance is provided by Newton-Raphson method doing iteration
 in every time step.
 The accuracy of the developed program is demonstrated by comparison with
 SAP2000, the generally accepted structural analysis program.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Resultant shear forces, story accelerations and story drifts of the first
 structure is determined by means of nonlinear time history analyses according
 to changing angular frequency of the second structure and effective period
 and damping values of base isolators.
 In addition, for the case of first structure have ten stories, the variation
 of story shear force coefficients for the changing number of story of the
 second structure is examined.
 Results are normalized according to values which obtain from the inspected
 base isolated structures with independent isolation plane.
 Thus, amplification in base shear forces of the structures can be determined
 depending on the angular frequency of the superstructures, equivalent period
 and equivalent damping of base isolator.
 Base shear force coefficients of the structures with common isolation plane
 are obtained and the results are compared according to the total shear
 force coefficient obtained by vector summation in the dynamic analysis.
 This rate of error is increasing in direct proportion to the order of the
 dynamic interaction of the structures.
 Additionally necessary joint spacing of two base isolated structures with
 common isolation plane is calculated as per related standard and compared
 to results obtained from the nonlinear dynamic analysis.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As a result of this study, it is determined that dynamic interaction of
 two base isolated structures with common isolation plane due to increasing
 damping ratio of base isolators, causes to increase shear coefficients,
 story drifts and maximum story accelerations significantly.
 This increment is determined to increase with the separation of the angular
 frequencies of the two structures.
 Therefore, if two structures have the same angular frequency, the resulting
 internal forces and displacements are equal for the same equivalent period
 and equivalent damping ratios base isolators.
 Base shear force of one story structure inspected from two base isolated
 structures with common isolation plane, increase with respect to vary other
 structure number of story according to situation that inspected structure
 with independent isolation plane.
 When the ten-story structure is examined, it is determined that the story
 shear forces increase in the lower stories and decrease in the upper stories.
 As a result of the analyses carried out for the three and four base isolated
 structure with common isolation plane, it is determined that the base shear
 force coefficients increase with the increase of the number of buildings
 having different angular frequency from the examined structure.
 Moreover, increasing in hysteretic damping causes to change lateral distributio
n of base shear forces to superstructure.
 Base shear force of structure is evenly distributed to every story for
 an equivalent damping value of %1, which is assumed to be linear of the
 isolators.
 Nevertheless, base shear force of structure is distributed in the form
 of an inverted triangle for increasing damping ratios.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
